.TH DECHAPTER 1 2025-04-05 "DECHAPTER 0.1.0"
.
.SH NAME
.P
dechapter \- losslessly merge chaptered video footage
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY dechapter
[<options>] [<file|dir> ...]
.YS
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
Some cameras split their video recordings into chunks known as chapters to mitigate data corruption or due to file system limitations. \%\fBdechapter\fR losslessly joins those chunks into single continuous video files.
.P
\%\fBdechapter\fR is preconfigured to recognize recordings that follow the file naming conventions used by GoPro cameras. The user may also add their own filename patterns to accomodate other cameras and manufacturers.
.
.SH NON-OPTIONS
.
.TP
\%<file>
An input file. Any files whose names don't match the naming patterns defined in \%\fBconf_filename_spec\fR are silently ignored.
.
.TP
\%<dir>
An input directory. Passing <dir> is the same as passing all files in <dir> and its subdirectories as non-option arguments. 
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
.TP
.B \%-d,\ --dest-dir\fR=<value>
A destination directory. If set to an empty string \%(''), the output files are placed in containing directories of the original files. The default value is \%''.
.
.TP
.B \%--dest-dir-create\fR[={always|prompt|never}]
Whether or not to create a destination directory if it does not exist.
.
.RS
.TP 10
[always]
Create a destination directory.
.TP
prompt
Ask if the user wants to create a destination directory. This is the default.
.TP
never
Do not create a destination directory.
.RE
.
.TP
.B \%--dest-dir-no-create
Do not create a destination directory if it does not exist. Equivalent to \%\fB--dest-dir-create\fR set to \%'never'.
.
.TP
.B \%-o,\ --output\fR=<value>
A string with placeholders that determines the names of the output files. If any forward slashes ('/') are found in this string, the part up until the last forward slash is considered a subdirectory prefix. Any subdirectories in that prefix will always be automatically created.
.sp
The default value is \%'%{name}-merged.mp4'.
.sp
The extension set in the value determines the output file's container format. For example, to use the Matroska container format, simply replace \%'.mp4' with \%'.mkv': \%'%{name}-merged.mkv'.
.sp
The following placeholders are supported:
.
.RS
.TP
%{name}
The basename of the original first chapter file without the extension.
.TP
%{id}
The recording id as it appears in the names of the original chaptered files.
.TP
%{date}
Recording creation time as stored in the original files' metadata. See also \%\fB--date-format\fR.
.TP
%{s}
The default or configured value of this option. Useful for adding a prefix to that value on the command line. For example, \%'CAM1-%s'.
.sp
This placeholder may not be used in the configuration file.
.P
See also PLACEHOLDER FORMAT.
.RE
.
.TP
.B \%--date-format\fR=<value>
A date format string that determines how the value of the \%%{date} placeholder is formatted. See \%\fBdate\fR(1) for a full list of format sequences.
.sp
The default value is \%'%Y-%m-%d_%H-%M-%S'.
.
.TP
.B \%-y[y],\ --overwrite\fR[={always|prompt|never}]
Whether or not to overwrite already existing files whose names match the output file name.
.
.RS
.TP 10
\%\fB-yy\fR\ / \%always
Overwrite already existing files.
.TP
\%\fB-y\fR\ / \%[prompt]
Ask if the user wants to overwrite an already existing file. This is the default.
.TP
never
Do not overwrite already existing files.
.RE
.
.TP
.B \%-Y,\ --no-overwrite\fR
Do not overwrite already existing files. Equivalent to \%\fB-y[y],\ --overwrite\fR set to \%'never'.
.
.TP
.B \%-x[x],\ --exec
Execute commands (as opposed to performing a dry run for preview purposes). This is the default.
.
.RS
.TP
.B \%-x
Perform the specified behavior of this option.
.TP
.B \%-xx
In addition to performing the specified behavior of this option, flip the decision value of \%\fB--exec-print\fR.
.RE
.
.TP
.B \%-X[X],\ --no-exec
Do not execute commands. Perform a dry run.
.
.RS
.TP
.B \%-X
Perform the specified behavior of this option.
.TP
.B \%-XX
In addition to performing the specified behavior of this option, flip the decision value of \%\fB--exec-print\fR.
.
.P
Note: \%\fBffmpeg\fR's "File \%'file.mp4' already exists. Overwrite?" prompt is not simulated and \%\fB-y[y],\ --overwrite\fR has no effect when \%\fB--no-exec\fR is set. Instead, a simple message is shown if a file already exists.
.RE
.
.TP
.B \%--exec-print\fR[={always|auto|never}]
Print commands and their arguments as they are being executed. The default value is \%'auto'.
.
.RS
.TP 10
[always]
Always print commands.
.TP
auto
Print commands only when performing a dry run (\%\fB--no-exec\fR).
.TP
never
Never print commands.
.
.P
\%\fB-xx\fR and \%\fB-XX\fR flip the decision value of this option. If this option is set to \%'auto', the decision is flipped. If this option is set to \%'always' or \%'never', the outcome is the opposite.
.RE
.
.TP
.B \%--exec-no-print\fR
Do not print commands and their arguments as they are being executed. Equivalent to \%\fB--exec-print\fR set to \%'never'.
.
.TP
.B \%--help
Open the man page.
.
.TP
.B \%--version
Print version information.
.
.TP
.B \%--config\fR[={edit|generate|remove|auto}]
Perform an action on the configuration file. See also CONFIGURATION and FILES below.
.
.RS
.TP
edit
Open an existing configuration file in a text editor.
.TP
generate
Generate a new configuration file.
.TP
remove
Delete an existing configuration file. If the configuration directory doesn't have any other files, it is also deleted.
.TP
[auto]
Generate a configuration file if it does not exist. If it does, open it in a text editor. This is the default.
.RE
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.P
This is how command line options and configuration variables correspond to each other. The command line option on the left sets the variable(s) on the right internally.
.P
Special symbols in the right column:
.
.TP
-
This option is non-configurable.
.TP
"
This option sets the same variable(s) as the one above.
.
.P
.TS
nokeep;
lb lb .
-d, --dest-dir\fR=<value>	opt_dest_dir
--dest-dir-create\fR[=<value>]	opt_dest_dir_create
--dest-dir-no-create	\fR"
-o, --output	opt_output
--date-format	opt_date_format
-y[y], --overwrite\fR[=<value>]	opt_overwrite
-Y, --no-overwrite	\fR"
-x[x], --exec	opt_exec
-X[X], --no-exec	\fR"
--exec-print\fR[=<value>]	opt_exec_print
--exec-no-print	\fR"
--help	\fR-
--version	\fR-
--config\fR[=<value>]	\fR-
.TE
.
.SS Configuration file-only parameters
.
.TP
.B conf_default_nonopts\fR (indexed array)
If no non-option arguments are passed, this value is used. Useful for setting default directories to scan for recordings.
.sp
See also NON-OPTIONS.
.
.TP
.B conf_filename_spec\fR (indexed array)
A filename format specification. It is used for identifying files as video recordings and locating chapters that belong to the same recording.
.sp
Values in this array are arranged in sets of three:
.
.RS
.TP
\%<name>
A descriptive name. This name must be unique.
.
.TP
\%<regex>
A Bash regular expression to match the first chapter of a recording. Must include a single capture group that captures the recording id. A recording id is a string that can be found in the name of each chapter file that identifies those files as being parts of the same recording.
.
.TP
\%<glob_format>
A format string to \%\fBprintf\fR which, when processed, produces a Bash glob pattern to match all chapters of a given recording starting with the second chapter. This value must include a sigle '%s' which gets substituted with the recording id obtained from matching <regex>.
.
.P
The sequence of these three elements may be repeated as many times as needed.
.RE
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.P
The values of \%\fBVISUAL\fR and \%\fBEDITOR\fR environment variables determine the text editor when opening configuration files with \%\fB--config\fR.
.P
\%\fBVISUAL\fR is evaluated first. If that is not set, then \%\fBEDITOR\fR is evaluated. If neither is set, \%\fBnano\fR is used as the text editor.
.
.SH FILES
.P
A configuration file can be used to change the default behavior of \fBdechapter\fR. See CONFIGURATION above for more information.
.P
The location of the configuration file is \%"$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/\:dechapter/\:config.bash". If \%\fBXDG_CONFIG_HOME\fR is not set, it defaults to \%"$HOME/\:.config".
.
.SH PLACEHOLDER FORMAT
.
.TP
(1)
\%%<name>
.sp
or
.TP
.TP
(2)
\%%{<name>:-<fallback>:+<override>}
.sp
\%:-<fallback> and \%:+<override> are optional and may go in any order.
.
.P
\%<name> is a placeholder name.
.P
\%<fallback> and \%<override> are also strings with placeholders just like the entire string.
.P
\%<fallback> is substituted if the replacement value is unavailable.
.P
\%<override> is substituted instead of the replacement value allowing to, for instance, insert extra characters next to it: \%'%{date:+%{date}_}%{name}.mp4'.
.P
In strings with placeholders, \%'\\', \%'%', \%'{', \%':', and \%'}' are special characters. They can be escaped with backslashes \%('\\') to represent their literal values.
.RE
.
.SH AUTHOR
.P
Alex Rogers \%<https://github.com/\:linguisticmind>
.
.SH HOMEPAGE
.P
\%<https://github.com/\:linguisticmind/\:dechapter>
.
.SH COPYRIGHT
.P
Copyright © 2025 Alex Rogers. License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later \%<https://gnu.org/\:licenses/\:gpl.html>.
.P
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it. There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
